---
layout: post
title: Log5j vs Log4j
date: 2013-04-02 05:15:00.000000000 -07:00
categories:
- log4j
- log5j
tags: []
status: publish
type: post
published: true

---
Log5j is a modern facade over the most heavily used logging framework Log4j that not only provides a better interface for logging but also performs better. Even though Log5j has a lot of advantages, most of the projects (even at Amazon) uses Log4j. You will find logs like this all over the code base
    
	log.info("this is the string with value " + value + " and it does stink with factor" + stinkfactor);

All those concatenations, yuck!

I found the interface of Log5j pretty awesome, specially when it allows to you log like
    
	log.info("this is the string with value %s and it does not stink",value);
	
But out of curiosity, I wanted to know how good its performance is. I did a simple test and found some interesting results.

###Experiment Setup
Unit tests with log4j configured with a FileAppender (similar to what every production environment uses). The log level was set to INFO (hence DEBUG was disabled). In each test, logs with different types of logging statements (with/without parameters) were emitted in a loop with a 2 million count. 

Randomly generated numbers were used as parameters in each loop just to avoid some optimizations that could be done by compiler if you have constant strings.

<div style="text-align: justify;"></div>
<table border="1" cellspacing="0">
<tbody>
<tr>
<th colspan="1">Use case </th>
<th colspan="2">Performance <br />(test finished in msec) </th>
<th colspan="1">Notes </th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th>Log 4j </th>
<th>Log 5j </th>
<th></th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: justify;">Debug log with parameters <br />no isDebugEnabled() <br />using String.format() to format log statement </td>
<td>6184 </td>
<td>183 </td>
<td>String.format() was used only for log4j to simulate what log5j does internally <br />Log5j does not need String.format() </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Debug log with parameters <br />no isDebugEnabled() <br />not using String.format() </td>
<td>1350 </td>
<td>265 </td>
<td>For log4j, logging statement like "log text" + param1 + " and other param" + random() was used. </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Debug log without parameters <br />no isDebugEnabled() </td>
<td>52 </td>
<td>142 </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Debug log with parameters <br />with isDebugEnabled() check for log4j </td>
<td>128 </td>
<td>183 </td>
<td>isDebugEnabled() not required for log5j </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Info log with parameters <br />using String.format() </td>
<td>50192 </td>
<td>45667 </td>
<td>String.format() was used for log4j to simulate what log5j does internally <br />Log5j does not need String.format() </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Info log with parameters <br />not using String.format() </td>
<td>34202 </td>
<td>52207 </td>
<td>- </td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Info log without parameters </td>
<td>31684 </td>
<td>30958 </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


###Conclusion

* Do not use String.format() with log4j, specially when that log level can be off in production (E.g. DEBUG is off in production). Its very expensive. 
* Log5j performs almost the same as Log4j even without any isLOGLEVELEnabled() (E.g. isDebugEnabled()) checks. Hence, it results in clean code without redundant log enabled checks. 
* Log5j provides a cleaner interface to log statements than Log4j (with a mess of appending variables within log text) with a small bearable overhead